.\" Álvaro Castro Castilla
.de xx
.in \\n(INu+\\$1
.ti -\\$1
..
.TH C++_NOTES 7 2009-04-23 "Reference" "Alvaro Castro Castilla"


.SH --- SYNTAX QUIRKS
.BR
.SS "Why is a[5] == 5[a] true?"
This is the direct artifact of arrays being pointers, "a" is a memory address. "a[5]" is the value that's 5 elements further from "a". The address of this element is "a + 5". This is equal to offset "a" from "5" elements at the beginning of the address space (5 + a).

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "a[5]" "  /* Evaluates to *(a + 5) */"
.BR "5[a]" "  /* Evaluates to *(5 + a) */"
.fi
.in

.SS "Bit specific structure"
To construct a bit specific structure, there are few things have to be taken care precisely.

1. Variable type used

2. Whether to use __attribute__((packed)) or not.

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "typedef struct {"
.BR "    char x:3,"
.BR "         y:8,"
.BR "         z:3;"
.BR "} PointCodeA;"
.BR "PointCodeA pc;"
.BR "printf(""%d "",sizeof(pc));" "  /* The sizeof(pc) will return 3 bytes
.RB "                            * because ""char"" is not large enough"
.RB "                            * to store 2 bytes of data. */"
.BR "typedef struct {"
.BR "     unsigned long x:3,"
.BR "                   y:8,"
.BR "                   z:3;"
.BR "} PointCodeB;"
.BR "PointCodeB pc;"
.BR "printf(""%d "",sizeof(pc));" "  /* The sizeof(pc) will return 4 bytes
.RB "                            * because the remaining 2 bytes will be
.RB "                            * padded with 0. */"
.BR ""
.BR "typedef struct {"
.BR "     unsigned long x:3,"
.BR "                   y:8,"
.BR "                   z:3;"
.BR "}__attribute__((packed)) PointCodeC;"
.BR "PointCodeC pc;"
.BR "printf(""%d "",sizeof(pc));" "  /* CORRECT: The sizeof(pc) will return
.RB "                            * 2 bytes because the packed data is now 
.RB "                            * exactly 14 bits. */"
.BR ""
.fi
.in

.SS "typename"
First use:

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "// Equivalent definitions:"
.BR "template <class T>"
.BR "template <typename T>"
.fi
.in

Second use:

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "// Imagine the following:"
.BR "template <class T>"
.BR "void foo() {"
.BR "    T::iterator * iter;"
.BR "}"
.RB ""
.RB "// This would work well:"
.BR "class ContainsAType {"
.BR "    class iterator { ... }:"
.BR "};"
.BR "foo<ContainsAType>();"
.BR ""
.RB "// But this would break the code:"
.BR "class ContainsAValue {"
.BR "    static int iterator;"
.BR "};"
.BR "foo<ContainsAValue>();" " /* Would parse foo() as a product of the"
.RB "                        * static variable T::iterator and a variable"
.RB "                        * called iter */"
.RB ""
.RB ""
.RB "// Before a qualified dependent type, you need typename"
.BR "template <class T>"
.BR "void foo() {"
.BR "    typename T::iterator * iter;"
.BR "    typename T::iterator iter2;" " /* Even where there is no syntactical"
.RB "                                 * ambiguity it must be used */"
.BR "    typedef typename T::iterator iterator_type;" " // Even typedef need it"
.BR "}"
.fi
.in


.SH --- LANGUAGE CONCEPTS
.BR
.SS "Qualified and unqualified names"
.BR
.in +4n
.nf
.RB "// Qualified names:"
.BR "std::cout << ""Hello!"";"
.BR "using std::cout;" " // Introduces std::cout in every cout COMPROBAR!"
.BR "cout << ""Hello!"";"
.RB ""
.RB "// Unqualified names:"
.BR "cout << ""Hello!"";"
.BR "using namespace std;" " // Makes it visible"
.BR "cout << ""Hello!"";"
.fi
.in

.SS "Dependent and non-dependent names"
A dependent name is a name that depends on a template parameter. typedefs transfer the quality of being dependent.

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "template <class T>
.BR "class MyClass {"
.RB "    // Declarations known at time of template declaration: non-dependent"
.BR "    int i;"
.BR "    vector<int> vi;"
.BR "    vector<int>::iterator vitr;"
.RB ""
.RB "    // Not known until the time of template instantiation: dependent"
.BR "    T t;"
.BR "    vector<T> vt;"
.BR "    vector<T>::iterator viter;"
.BR "    typedef T another_name_for_T;" " // typedef transfers the quality"
.BR "};"
.fi
.in

.SH --- COMMON TASKS
.BR
.SS "Struct comparison"
.BR
.in +4n
.nf
.BR "struct A x, y;"
.BR ""
.BR "inline bool operator==(const A& x, const A& y)"
.BR "{"
.BR "    return (memcmp(&x, &y, sizeof(struct A)) == 0);"
.BR "}"
.fi
.in
