.\" Álvaro Castro Castilla
.de xx
.in \\n(INu+\\$1
.ti -\\$1
..
.TH VIM_HACKS 7 2009-04-27 "Reference" "Alvaro Castro Castilla"


.SH --- TIPS AND TRICKS
.BR
.SS ":w !sudo tee %"
Save a file you edited in vim without the needed permissions


.SH --- EXTERNAL PROGRAMS
.BR
.SS "Berkeley Par"
Format text paragraphs.

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "# No more than 78 characters on each line"
.BR "par -w78"
.RB "# ...Also justify"
.BR "par -w78j"
.RB "# Comment box"
.BR "par 60r"
.fi
.in

.SS "Tidy"
Format XML/HTML files and make them W3C comliant.

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "# For XML files"
.BR "tidy --input-xml true --indent yes -q"
.RB "# For HTML files"
.BR "tidy --indent yes -q"
.fi
.in

.SS "Indent"
Format C code.

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "# The Kernighan & Ritchie style"
.BR "indent -kr"
.RB "# Berkeley style"
.BR "indent -orig"
.fi
.in


.SH --- VIM SCRIPTING
.BR
.SS "Types"
There are only 2 types: strings and numbers.

Numbers can be represented in three ways. These representations can be mixed in operations.

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "Decimal number:       1     2     10    100
.RB "Hexadecimal number:   0x01  0x02  0x0A  0x64
.RB "Octal:                01    02    012   0144
.fi
.in

Strings can be represented in either single or double quotes. If you need to use the character you used to encapsulate the string, you need to escape it with a backslash. In a single quoted string everything is shown as it is represented in the literal string (it does not interpret them).

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "echo ""Hello world"""
.BR "echo 'Hello world'
.BR "echo ""This \e"" needs to be escaped"""
.BR "echo 'This "" does not need to be escaped'"
.BR ""
.RB """ This will print two lines:"
.BR "echo ""Hello in\en two lines"""
.RB """ This will print only one:"
.BR "echo 'Hello in\en one line'"
.BR ""
.RB """ Special escaped characters"
.RB ""
.RB "\en     Newline, line break"
.RB "\er     Carriage return"
.RB "\et     Tab space"
.RB "\e123   Octal number"
.RB "\ex123  Hexadecimal number"
.RB "\eu     Character encoded as up to 4 hex numbers (\eu01fc34)"
.RB "\ef     Form feed"
.RB "\ee     Esc"
.RB "\eb     Backspace"
.RB "\e\e     Backslash"
.RB "\e<CR>  Vim-specific key acronyms"
.fi
.in

.SS "Variables"
There are 5 types of variables.

.in +4n
.nf
.RB """ String:"
.BR "let mystring = ""a text string""
.BR ""
.RB """ Number:"
.BR "let mynum = 100"
.BR ""
.RB """ List:"
.BR "let mylist = [1, 2, "three", 0x04, myvar]"
.BR "let mylist2 = [[1,2,3],[""four"", ""five"", ""six""]]"
.BR ""
.RB """ Dictionary:"
.BR "let mydict = {1: ""one"", 2: ""two"", 3: ""three""}"
.BR "let mydict2 = {1: ""one"", ""tens"":{0: ""ten"", 1: ""eleven""}}"
.BR ""
.RB """ Funcref:"
.BR "let myfuncref = function(""MyFunction"")"
.BR "echo myfuncref()"
.BR "call myfuncref(arg1, arg2, ...)"
.BR
.fi
.in

Automatic conversion

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "let mystring = ""100"""
.BR "let mynum = mystring-50
.BR ""
.RB "Input                -------->  Output"
.BR ""
.RB """hello"" . ""world""               ""hello world"""
.RB """number"" . 123                  ""number 123"""
.RB """123"" + 100                     223"
.RB """123"" - 100 . ""points""          ""23 points"""
.RB """123"" - 100 + ""points""          23"
.fi
.in

The scopes

.in +4n
.nf
.RB "v:     Vim predefined global scope (see functions)"
.RB "g:     Global scope"
.RB "b:     Buffer scope"
.RB "t:     Tab scope"
.RB "w:     Window scope (current viewport)"
.RB "l:     Function scope (local to the function)"
.RB "s:     Source file scope (local to a loaded script)"
.RB "a:     Argument scope (refer to arguments in functions)"
.BR ""
.BR "let g:sum=0
.BR "function SumNumbers(num1,num2)
.BR "    let l:sum = a:num1 + a:num2"
.BR "    let g:sum = l:sum"
.BR "endfunction"
.fi
.in

Lists

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "let mylist = [1,2,""three"",0x04,myvar]
.RB """ Access the third element"
.BR "echo mylist[2]"
.RB """ Acess multi-dimensional list"
.BR "let mylist2 = [[1,2,3],[""four"",""five"",""six""]]
.BR "echo mylist2[0][1]"
.RB """ Access backwards (-0 doesn't exist)"
.BR "echo mylist2[-1][-3]"
.RB """ Accessing non-existing indexes gives an error. You can prevent it:"
.BR "echo get(mylist, 2)"
.RB """ Add another item"
.BR "call add(mylist, 5)"
.RB """ Concatenate lists"
.BR "let mylist3 = mylist + mylist2"
.BR "let mylist3 += [5,6,7,8]"
.BR "call extend(mylist, [5,6,7,8])"
.RB """ Remove item from the list"
.BR "call remove(mylist, 3)"
.fi
.in

Dictionaries

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "let mydict = {'banana': 'yellow', 'apple': 'green'}
.RB """ Access"
.BR "echo mydict['apple']
.BR "mydict.apple"
.RB """ Modify"
.BR "let mydict['apple'] = 'red'
.fi
.in

.SS "Logical operators"
These operators can be used on both string and numeric values. In the case of strings, it evaluates according to ASCII value.

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "val1 == val2" "       val1 equals val2"
.BR "val1 != val2" "       val1 is not equal to val2"
.BR "val1 > val2" "        val1 is higher than val2"
.BR "val1 < val2" "        val1 is lower than val2"
.BR "val1 >= val2" "       val1 is higher than or equal to val2"
.BR "val1 <= val2" "       val1 is lower than or equal to val2"
.fi
.in

These operators are exclusively for strings. The strings can be "regular expression" so you can match str2 on str1.

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "str1 =~ str2" "       str1 contains substring str2 or is equal to str2"
.BR "str1 !~ str2" "       str1 does not contain and is not equal to str2"
.fi
.in

.SS "Loops"
"For" construction

.in +4n
.nf
.BI "for " "var " "in " "range"
.IB "    code-to-execute"
.BI "endfor"
.BR ""
.BI "for " "var " "in " "list"
.IB "    code-to-execute"
.BI "endfor"
.BR ""
.BI "for " "keyvar " "in keys( " "list " ")"
.IB "    code-to-execute list" "[ keyvar ]"
.BI "endfor"
.fi
.in

"While" construction

.in +4n
.nf
.BI "while " "condition"
.IB "    code-to-execute"
.BI "endwhile"
.BR ""
.RB """ break will interrupt execution of the loop. Flow jumps after endwhile."
.BI "while " "condition"
.BI "    break"
.BI "endwhile"
.RB """ <---- Flow jumps here"
.BR ""
.RB """ continue will interrupt execution. Flow jumps to the while statement."
.RB """ <---- Flow jumps here"
.BI "while " "condition"
.BI "    continue"
.BI "endwhile"
.fi
.in

.SS "Conditions"
"If" construction

.in +4n
.nf
.BI "if " "condition"
.IB "    code-to-execute"
.BI "endif"
.fi
.in

"If-else" construction

.in +4n
.nf
.BI "if " "condition"
.IB "    code-to-execute-if-condition-is-true"
.BI "else"
.IB "    code-to-execute-if-condition-is-false"
.BI "endif"
.fi
.in

"If-elseif" cosntruction

.in +4n
.nf
.BI "if " "condition-1"
.IB "    code-to-execute-if-condition-1-is-true"
.BI "elseif " "condition-2"
.IB "    code-to-execute-if-condition-2-is-true"
.BI "endif"
.fi
.in

.SS "Functions"
Basics

.in +4n
.nf
.RB """ It can have as many as 20 arguments. The ! symbol will redefine any
.RB """ function with the same name"
.BI "function! " "Name(arg1, arg2, ...argN) keyword"
.RB "    code-to-execute"
.BI "    return " "value-or-variable"
.BR "endfunction"
.BR ""
.RB """ Remove a function definition"
.BI "delfunction " "Name"
.fi
.in

Function for a range

.in +4n
.nf
.RB """ Indicate that this is a range function. That will call the function"
.RB """ only once for a range of lines, instead of once for each one of them."
.BI "function! numberList() range"
.IB "    code-to-execute-only-once"
.BI "endfunction"
.fi
.in

Function on dictionary

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "let mynumbers = {0:'zero',1:'one'}"
.RB """ Indicate that this is a dictionary function. This will create the"
.RB """ variable ""self"" refering to the dictionary to which is bound."
.RB """ v:val is the value from ""map"""
.BR "function mynumbers.convert(numb) dict"
.BR "    return join(map(split(a:numb,'\ezs'),'get(self, v:val, ""unknown"")'))"
.BR "endfunction"
.BR ""
.BR "echo mynumbers.convert(""010101"")"
.BR ""
.fi
.fi

Variable argument list

.in +4n
.nf
.BR "function! foo(arg1, arg2, ...)"
.BR "    let sum = a:arg1 + a:arg2"
.BR "    let argnum = 1"
.RB """ The special variable a:0 contains the number of arguments"
.BR "    while argnum <= a:0"
.RB """ To look up the argument in the list of optional arguments"
.RB """ we use a:{argnum}. Those are the arguments after arg2"
.BR "        let sum += a:{argnum}"
.BR "        let argnum += 1"
.BR "    endwhile"
.RB """ Vim has another special variable called a:000 which acts as a list."
.BR "    for arg in a:000"
.BR "        echo arg"
.BR "    endfor"
.BR "    return sum"
.BR "endfunction"
.fi
.in

Predefined functions

.in +4n
.nf
.BR ":help 'function-list'
.fi
.in

.SS "Example script structure"
This example follows the recommended structure for script development.

.in +4n
.nf
.RB """ myscript.vim – Example script to show how a script is structured."
.RB """ Version : 1.0"
.RB """ Last modified : 28/04/2009"
.RB """ License : This script is released under the Vim License."
.BR ""
.RB """ check if script is already loaded"
.BR "if exists(""loaded_myscript"")"
.BR "    finish ""stop loading the script"""
.BR "endif"
.BR "let loaded_myscript=1"
.BR ""
.BR "let s:global_cpo = &cpo  " """ store compatible-mode in local variable"
.BR "set cpo&vim              " """ go into nocompatible-mode"
.BR ""
.RB """ ######## CONFIGURATION ########"
.RB """ variable myscript_path"
.BR "if !exists(""myscript_path"")"
.BR "    let s:vimhomepath = split(&runtimepath,',')"
.BR "    let s:myscript_path = s:vimhomepath[0].""/plugin/myscript.vim"""
.BR "else"
.BR "    let s:myscript_path = myscript_path"
.BR "    unlet myscript_path"
.BR "endif"
.BR ""
.RB """ variable myscript_indent"
.BR "if !exists(""myscript_indent"")"
.BR "    let s:myscript_indent = 4"
.BR "else"
.BR "    let s:myscript_indent = myscript_indent"
.BR "    unlet myscript_indent"
.BR "endif"
.BR ""
.RB """ ######## FUNCTIONS #########"
.RB """ this is our local function with a mapping"
.BR "function s:MyfunctionA()"
.BR "    echo ""This is the script-scope function MyfunctionA speaking"""
.BR "endfunction"
.BR ""
.RB """ this is a global function which can be called by anyone"
.BR "function MyglobalfunctionB()"
.BR "    echo ""Hello from the global-scope function myglobalfunctionB"""
.BR "endfunction"
.BR ""
.RB """ this is another global function which can be called by anyone"
.BR "function MyglobalfunctionC()"
.BR "    echo ""Hello from MyglobalfuncionC() now calling locally:"""
.BR "    call <SID>MyfunctionA()"
.BR "endfunction"
.BR ""
.RB """ return to the users own compatible-mode setting"
.BR ":let &cpo = s:global_cpo"
.fi
.in
